SAMPL4 : Hydration free energy prediction challenge
----------------------------------------------------

Results obtained by : Oliver Beckstein (Arizona State University, Department of Physics, Tempe, AZ, USA), Anais Fourrier and Bogdan I. Iorga (Institut de Chimie des Substances Naturelles, CNRS, Gif-sur-Yvette, France).

We are submitting three sets of predictions for this challenge, which were generated using MD simulations with OPLS-AA force field parameters and the following procedure:

Detailed description of the prediction method
=============================================

Three-dimensional structures of the 52 compounds included in the whole SAMPL4 data set (blind and supplementary) were generated using CORINA v3.44 from the SMILES strings provided. OPLS-AA parameterization was done automatically using the MOL2FF tool that is currently being developed by our groups (Beckstein, Iorga, et al., unpublished). For several compounds, there were some angles and dihedrals missing from the OPLS-AA force field which were fitted using an in house script. Compounds 21, 27-29 and 40 could not be correctly parameterized by MOL2FF because the atom types corresponding to N-methyl imidazoles, nitrates and dialkyl peroxides were not present in the OPLS-AA force field. These chemical groups were parameterized separately as follows:

1. N-methyl imidazole
Hydration free energy was calculated for imidazole using the same general procedure and two different sets of partial charges: i) from OPLS-AA parameters of imidazole (atom types #557-565), and ii) adapted from OPLS-AA parameters of histidine. The comparison with the experimental values (-9.81 kcal/mol [1,2] or -9.63 kcal/mol [3]) showed that the second parameter set is better, with an absolute value of the prediction error of 0.82-1.00 kcal/mol. Similarly, hydration free energy was calculated for N-methyl imidazole using the two sets of partial charges mentioned above, the charge of the H(N) atom replaced by the Me group being transferred either on the intracyclic N atom or on the extracyclic C atom from the methyl group. Comparison with the experimental value (-8.41 kcal/mol [3]) showed that again the histidine partial charges are the best, with the H(N) charges transferred to the exocyclic C atom (absolute value of the prediction error of 0.30 kcal/mol). Consequently, these last parameters were used for the parameterization of N-benzyl imidazole (compound 21) with MOL2FF.

2. Nitrates
Partial charges were calculated for methyl nitrate and ethyl nitrate using the Protocols 2 and 3 (see below for details). Six different combinations of partial charges were defined, with variations on the ON and NO atoms (ester parameters - #467-469,490-492 - were used for the OS, CT and HC neighboring atoms), and used for the calculation of hydration free energy (using the same standard procedure) for 6 compounds with known experimental values (butyl nitrate, isobutyl nitrate, 2-butyl nitrate, ethyleneglycol mononitrate, nitroglycol and 1,2-dinitroxypropane [2,4]). Missing bond distances, angles and dihedrals were fitted using an in house script. From the comparison with the experimental values it was observed that different charge sets are best for simulations involving mono and di-nitro compounds (absolute values of the prediction error of 0.30 and 0.12 kcal/mol, respectively). Finally, we chose a common value for all nitrates which leads to absolute values of the prediction error of 0.30 kcal/mol for mono-nitro compounds, 0.80 kcal/mol for di-nitro compounds, and 0.47 kcal/mol overall. This common value was used for the parameterization of compounds 27-29 with MOL2FF.

3. Dialkyl peroxides
Partial charges were calculated for dimethyl peroxide using the Protocols 2 and 3 (see below for details). Five different combinations of partial charges were defined, with variations on the OS and CT atoms (standard alkyl parameters - #140 - were used for the HC neighboring atoms), and used for the calculation of hydration free energy (using the same standard procedure) for dimethyl peroxide and diethyl peroxide, the only two compounds with known experimental values found in the litterature [2]. Missing bond distances, angles and dihedrals were fitted using an in house script. The comparison with the experimental values (-5.28 and -5.32 kcal/mol, respectively [2]) showed a very important difference compared with the calculated values, which were quite homogeneous (-1.17...-0.43 and -0.51...+0.52 kcal/mol, respectively). We are currently investigating the reasons for such a big difference. Finally, we chose the charge parameter set that leads to the closest computed values compared with the experimental data, although the prediction error is very important (absolute values between 4.11 and 4.81 kcal/mol). This charge parameter set was used for the parameterization of compound 40 with MOL2FF.


The only difference between the three predictions submitted for this SAMPL4 challenge is the partial charges of the compounds that were used in the MD simulaions. These charges were obtained using different protocols [5]:
Protocol 1: native (transferrable) OPLS-AA partial charges are directly used.
Protocol 2: LMP2/cc-pVTZ(-F) QM charges are obtained by geometry optimization and electrostatic potential (ESP) fitting, using Jaguar at the LMP2/cc-pVTZ(-F) level; the charges for chemically equivalent atoms obtained from the Jaguar calculations output were generally not identical, and they were adjusted manually before further use.
Protocol 3: HF/6-31G* QM charges are obtained by geometry optimization and CHelpG charges calculation using Gaussian03 at the HF/6-31G* level, then a two-stage RESP fitting using AmberTools.

Equilibrium MD simulations of the neutral ligand in water (10 ns for each) and free energy perturbation simulations (5 Coulomb and 16 VDW windows, 5 ns each) were carried out using Gromacs 4.5.5. The analysis has been done using the thermodynamic integration method, as implemented in a modified version of GromacsWrapper (Beckstein et al, unpublished). The detailed procedure can be found in our SAMPL3 paper [5].

We observed that the VDW term of the hydration free energy, which was expected to be the same for the three protocols (all the parameters being similar, except for the partial charges of compounds), differs quite significantly in some cases. This behavior, which is not unexpected considering the warnings received from the SAMPL4 organizers) is believed to be due to insufficient conformational sampling during the simulations, but no precise dihedrals with slow rotation could be yet evidenced. This issue is currently under investigation. In order to minimize its impact on the overall result, a correction was introduced as follows: i) if the difference between the maximal and minimal values of the VDW terms from the three protocols is < 3 kJ/mol, the results are considered to be coherent, the mean value of the three entries is calculated, and then used to recalculate the overall hydration free energy for the three protocols; ii) if the difference between the maximal and minimal values of the VDW terms from the three protocols is > 3 kJ/mol, the outlier value is discarded and the two remaining entries (which were found to be always within 3 kJ/mol) are used to calculate a mean value which is then used, as above, to recalculate the overall hydration free energy for the three protocols.

The predictions for this challenge, submitted as ANSWER 1, ANSWER 2 and ANSWER 3, were obtained using this general procedure and the charges from Protocols 1, 2 and 3, respectively. For all calculated values, the predicted model uncertainty was set to 2.00 kcal/mol, which is considered as the average error for a data set containing "difficult" compounds, except for compounds 21, 27, 28 and 29 (ANSWER 1), for which we have a greater confidence and we set a value of 1.00 kcal/mol, and for compound 40 (ANSWER 1, 2 and 3) where the error is probably bigger, estimated to 4.00 kcal/mol.


Experimental hydration free energy values for some compounds from the supplementary set
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
We are aware of the existence of experimental hydration free energy data for compounds 30, 37, 39, 41-44, 46, 49 [1-4,6-8] but no action was taken to modify the calculated values, that were obtained using our general procedure [5], in order to minimize the prediction error.


References
----------
1. Nicholls A, Mobley DL, Guthrie JP, Chodera JD, Bayly CI, Cooper MD, Pande VS. Predicting small-molecule solvation free energies: an informal blind test for computational chemistry. J Med Chem. 2008 Feb 28;51(4):769-79.
2. Marenich, A. V.; Kelly, C. P.; Thompson, J. D.; Hawkins, G. D.; Chambers, C. C.; Giesen, D. J.; Winget, P.; Cramer, C. J.; Truhlar, D. G. Minnesota Solvation Database - version 2009, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, 2009 (http://comp.chem.umn.edu/mnsol/).
3. Mobley DL, Bayly CI, Cooper MD, Shirts MR, Dill KA. Small molecule hydration free energies in explicit solvent: An extensive test of fixed-charge atomistic simulations. J Chem Theory Comput. 2009 Feb 10;5(2):350-358.
4. Guthrie JP. A blind challenge for computational solvation free energies: introduction and overview. J Phys Chem B. 2009 Apr 9;113(14):4501-7.
5. Beckstein O, Iorga BI. Prediction of hydration free energies for aliphatic and aromatic chloro derivatives using molecular dynamics simulations with the OPLS-AA force field. J Comput Aided Mol Des. 2012 May;26(5):635-45.
6. Geballe MT, Guthrie JP. The SAMPL3 blind prediction challenge: transfer energy overview. J Comput Aided Mol Des. 2012 May;26(5):489-96.
7. Shivakumar D, Williams J, Wu Y, Damm W, Shelley J, Sherman W. Prediction of absolute solvation free energies using molecular dynamics free energy perturbation and the OPLS force field. J Chem Theory Comput. 2010, 6, 1509-19.
8. Chamberlin AC, Cramer CJ, Truhlar DG. Predicting aqueous free energies of solvation as functions of temperature. J Phys Chem B. 2006 Mar 23;110(11):5665-75.
